SEGMENTATION AND HISTOGRAM GENERATION USING THE HSV COLOR SPACE FOR
IMAGE RETRIEVAL
Shamik Sural, Gang Qian and Sakti Pramanik
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering,
3115 Engineering Building, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.
shamik@ieee.org, {qiangang, pramanik}@cse.msu.edu
ABSTRACT
We have analyzed the properties of the HSV (Hue,
Saturation and Value) color space with emphasis on the
visual perception of the variation in Hue, Saturation and
Intensity values of an image pixel. We extract pixel
features by either choosing the Hue or the Intensity as the
dominant property based on the Saturation value of a
pixel. The feature extraction method has been applied for
both image segmentation as well as histogram generation
applications – two distinct approaches to content based
image retrieval (CBIR). Segmentation using this method
shows better identification of objects in an image. The
histogram retains a uniform color transition that enables
us to do a window-based smoothing during retrieval. The
results have been compared with those generated using the
RGB color space.
1. INTRODUCTION
We have done in-depth analysis of the visual properties of
the HSV color space and its usefulness in content based
image retrieval applications. In particular, we have
developed image segmentation and histogram generation
applications using this color space – two important
methods in CBIR [5,7].
Segmentation is done to decompose an image into
meaningful parts for further analysis, resulting in a higherlevel representation of the image pixels like the
foreground objects and the background. In region-based
CBIR applications, segmentation is essential for
identifying objects present in a query image and each of
the database images. Wang et al [12] have used the LUV
values of a group of 4X4 pixels along with three features
obtained by wavelet transform of the L component for
determining regions of interest. Region-based retrieval has
also been used in the NeTra system [4] and the Blobworld
system [1]. We segment color images using features
extracted from the HSV space as a step in the regionbased matching approach to CBIR. The HSV color space
is fundamentally different from the widely known RGB
color space since it separates out the Intensity (luminance)
from the color information (chromaticity). Again, of the
two chromaticity axes, a difference in Hue of a pixel is
found to be visually more prominent compared to that of
the Saturation. For each pixel we, therefore, choose either
its Hue or the Intensity as the dominant feature based on
its Saturation. We then segment the image by grouping
pixels with similar features using the K-means clustering
algorithm [3].
A standard way of generating a color histogram of an
image is to concatenate ‘N’ higher order bits for the Red,
Green and Blue values in the RGB space [11]. The
histogram then has 23N bins, which accumulate the count
of pixels with similar color. It is also possible to generate
three separate histograms, one for each channel, and
concatenate them into one [2]. Smith and Chang [8] have
used a color set approach to extract spatially localized
color information. Ortega et al [6] have used the HS coordinates to form a two-dimensional histogram where
each bin contains the percentage of pixels in the image
that have corresponding H and S colors for that bin. We
generate a one-dimensional histogram from the HSV
space where a perceptually smooth transition of color is
obtained in the feature vector. This enables us to use a
window-based smoothing of histograms so that similar
colors can be matched between a query and each of the
database images.
We explain the HSV-based feature extraction and
image segmentation method in the next section and the
histogram generation technique in section 3. We then
present experimental results in section 4 and draw
conclusions from our work in the last section of the paper.
2. IMAGE SEGMENTATION USING FEATURES
FROM THE HSV COLOR SPACE
2.1. Analysis of the HSV Color Space
A three dimensional representation of the HSV color
space is a hexacone, where the central vertical axis
represents the Intensity [9]. Hue is defined as an angle in
the range [0,2S] relative to the Red axis with red at angle
0, green at 2S/3, blue at 4S/3 and red again at 2S.
Saturation is the depth or purity of the color and is
measured as a radial distance from the central axis with
value between 0 at the center to 1 at the outer surface. For
S=0, as one moves higher along the Intensity axis, one
goes from Black to White through various shades of gray.
On the other hand, for a given Intensity and Hue, if the
Saturation is changed from 0 to 1, the perceived color
changes from a shade of gray to the most pure form of the
0-7803-7622-6/02/$17.00 ©2002 IEEE IEEE ICIP 2002 II - 589
color represented by its Hue. Looked from a different
angle, any color in the HSV space can be transformed to a
shade of gray by sufficiently lowering the Saturation. The
value of Intensity determines the particular gray shade to
which this transformation converges. When Saturation is
near 0, all pixels, even with different Hues, look alike and
as we increase the Saturation towards 1, they tend to get
separated and are visually perceived as the true colors
represented by their Hues as shown in figure 1. Thus, for
low values of Saturation, a color can be approximated by a
gray value specified by the Intensity level while for higher
Saturation, the color can be approximated by its Hue. The
Saturation threshold that determines this transition is once
again dependent on the Intensity. For low intensities, even
for a high Saturation, a color is close to the gray value and
vice versa. Saturation gives an idea about the depth of
color and human eye is less sensitive to its variation
compared to variation in Hue or Intensity. We, therefore,
use the Saturation value of a pixel to determine whether
the Hue or the Intensity is more pertinent to human visual
perception of the color of that pixel and ignore the actual
value of the Saturation. It is observed that for higher
values of intensity, a saturation of 0.2 differentiates
between Hue and Intensity dominance. Assuming the
maximum Intensity value to be 255, we use the following
threshold function to determine if a pixel should be
represented by its Hue or its Intensity as its dominant
feature.
thsat(V) = 
255
0.8V 1.0  (1)
In the above equation, we see that for V=0, th(V) =
1.0, meaning that all the colors are approximated as black
whatever be the Hue or the Saturation. On the other hand,
with increasing values of the Intensity, Saturation
threshold that separates Hue dominance from Intensity
dominance goes down.
2.2. Feature Generation using the HSV Color Space
We generate features by utilizing the above properties of
the HSV color space for clustering pixels into segmented
regions. Figure 2(a) shows an image and figure 2(b)
shows the same image using the approximated pixels after
Saturation thresholding. Pixels with sub-threshold
Saturation have been represented by their gray values
while the other pixels have been represented by their
Hues. The feature generation used by us makes an
approximation of the color of each pixel in the form of
thresholding. On the other hand, features generated from
the RGB color space approximate by considering a few
higher order bits. In figures 2(c) - (d) we show the same
image approximated with the six lower-order bits all set to
0 and all set to 1, respectively. It is seen that the
approximation done by the RGB features blurs the
distinction between two visually separable colors by
changing the brightness. On the other hand, the HSVbased approximation can determine the intensity and
shade variations near the edges of an object, thereby
sharpening the boundaries and retaining the color
information of each pixel. This phenomenon is exhibited
in detail in figure 3. Figure 3(a) shows a number of solid
colors with varying intensities. Figure 3(b)-(c) shows the
result of approximation using the RGB color space taking
the 2 higher order bits. It is seen that some of the colors
with high intensities cannot be recognized, as they are
inseparable from the background. Also, we see that the
background of white and gray are considered equivalent
due to approximation. The HSV features used by us retain
the identity of the colors even at these intensity levels as
seen in figure 3(d). This makes the HSV-based features
very useful in running segmentation algorithms like
clustering on the approximated pixels.
2.3. Pixel Grouping by K-means Clustering Algorithm
The RGB value of a pixel is first transformed to the HSV
value using a method suggested in [9]. The feature is next
extracted from each image pixel. After extraction, the
pixel features are clustered using the K-Means clustering
algorithm to group them into regions of similar color.
Since the Hue and the Intensity values belong to the same
number space, the two sets of data are clustered separately
so that the color and the gray value pixels are not
considered in the same cluster. In the K-means clustering
algorithm, we start with K=2 and adaptively increase the
number of clusters till the improvement in error falls
below a threshold or a maximum number of clusters is
reached. We set the maximum number of clusters to 12
and an error improvement threshold over number of
clusters to 5 %.
3. HISTOGRAM GENERATION
We also use the HSV color space for histogram generation
where each pixel contributes either its Hue or its Intensity
as explained in the last section. We extract the color
histogram as the feature vector having two parts: (i) A
representation of the Hue between 0 and 2S quantized
after a transformation and (ii) A quantized set of gray
values as shown in figure 4(a). The number of
components in the feature vector generated based on Hue
is given by:
Nh = ª º 2ʌ MULT__FCTR  

Here MULT_FCTR determines the quantization level
for the Hues. We typically choose a value of 8. The
number of components representing gray values is:
Ng =  »
»
º «
«
ª
DIV_FCTR
Imax + 1 

Here Imax is the maximum value of the Intensity,
usually 255, and DIV_FCTR determines the number of
quantized gray levels. We, typically, choose DIV_FCTR =
II - 590
16. The quantized values of Hue may be considered
circularly arranged since Hue varies between 0 to 2S, both
the end points being red. The feature vector is thus a
combination of two independent vectors as shown in
figure 4(b).
It has been observed that, when color histograms are
extracted from two similar images, often two neighboring
components in the histograms have high values. This is
due to the fact that two colors that appear close to the
human eye may have a small difference in shade and map
to two neighboring components in the histogram. When a
standard measure like the Euclidean distance is used to
order such feature vectors, the result shows a high
distance value. To overcome this drawback, we compare
two histograms through smoothing windows instead of
comparing the vector components directly. All the
conventional color histograms fail to provide the requisite
perceptual gradation of colors in the feature vectors as
required by such a comparison. The histogram generated
by us retains this property in the feature vector. For the jth
component (j  [0, Nh+Nv-1]), with a smoothing window
size of 2N+1, the average value is calculated as follows:
Histw [j] = ¦

 

j N
i j N
w(i j)Hist[i]where w(i-j) = 2-|i-j| (4)
Since we derive both the Hue and the gray level
features using the HSV space, there are two independent
color continuums in the histogram, one from RedÆ
GreenÆBlueÆRed and the other from
BlackÆGrayÆWhite. The circular nature of the Hue
components and the discontinuity at the Hue-Intensity
component boundary are taken care of programmatically.
The use of the new histogram shows an improved
performance over conventional histograms generated from
the RGB color space. The smoothing window further
tunes the result of retrieval.
4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
4.1. Segmentation Results
We have tested the algorithm on a large number of natural
scene images. In this paper we demonstrate results that
represent our findings from these experiments. In figures
5(a)-(c), we show three images, their HSV-based
segmentation results and RGB-based segmentation results.
For RGB, we consider the higher order 2 bits to generate
the feature vectors. In the images, we have painted the
different regions using the color represented by the
centroid of the clusters to give an idea about the
differentiation capabilities of the two color spaces.
Although exact segmentation of unconstrained color
images is still a difficult problem, we see that the object
boundaries can be identified in a way more similar to
human perception of the same. The RGB features, on the
other hand, fail to determine the color and Intensity
variations and come up with clusters that put neighboring
pixels with similar color but small difference in shade to
different clusters. Often, two distinct colors are merged
together. For the first image in figure 5, it is seen that
RGB clustering could not detect the object boundary at all
with the color of the man’s body merged with the color of
the river due to high brightness. In the second image, we
see that the sky has been identified as three regions and
also the bush in front of the castle is interspersed with the
color of the brick wall. In the third image, the faces of the
people could not be identified distinctly. In some cases, a
face was clustered along with the color of the dress of the
subject. In the HSV-based approach, better clustering was
achieved in all the cases with proper segmentation. The
clustered image pixels may be further processed to merge
small image regions into larger blocks for marking the
exact object boundaries.
4.2. Histogram based Image Retrieval Results
We have developed an interface using Java applet that
displays images similar to a query image from a database
of about 14,500 images obtained from the web and IMSI
master clips. Figures 6(a)-(b) show the recall and
precision of image retrieval using a standard RGB
histogram and the new histogram. For the new histogram,
we show results for different widths of the smoothing
window. From the figures, it is seen that the new
histogram performs much better than an RGB histogram
based system. In most cases, recall and precision values
are higher for the same number of nearest neighbors. It is
also observed that application of a window with small
width improves the result set. Again, for a very large
window width, different distinct colors tend to get added
up and hence we do not see better results anymore. Such a
comparison cannot be done with the RGB features due to
the lack of color continuity in the generated histogram as
explained in the last section. Some of the preliminary
results in terms of actual retrieved images are available in
[10].
5. CONCLUSIONS
We have studied some of the important properties of the
HSV color space and have developed a framework for
extracting features that can be used both for image
segmentation and color histogram generation – two
important approaches to content based image retrieval.
Our approach makes use of the Saturation value of a pixel
to determine if the Hue or the Intensity of the pixel is
more close to human perception of color that pixel
represents. The K-means clustering of features combines
pixels with similar color for segmentation of the image
into objects. We are also able to generate a histogram that
enables us to perform a window-based smoothing of the
vectors during retrieval of similar images. While it is well
II - 591
established that color itself cannot retain semantic
information beyond a certain degree, we have shown that
retrieval results can be considerably improved by
choosing a better histogram.
 
Figure 1. Variation of color perception with saturation
(Decreasing from 1 to 0 left to right ) for a fixed value of
Intensity and Hue = 0 (Red), Hue = 2S/3 (Green), Hue = 4S/3
(Blue).
 2(a) 2(b) 2(c) 2(d)
Figure 2. (a) Original Image (b) HSV Approximation (c) RGB
approximation with all low order bits set to 0 and (d) RGB
approximation with all low order bits set to 1.
 3(a) 3(b) 3(c) 3(d)
Figure 3. (a) Original Colors (b) HSV Approximation (c) RGB
approximation with all low order bits set to 0 and (d) RGB
approximation with all low order bits set to 1.
4(a)
4(b)
Figure 4. (a) Representation of colors in the histogram and (b)
Circular representation of hue and linear representation of gray
values in the histogram.
 5(a)
 5(b)
 5(c)
Figure 5. (a) Original Images (b) Segmentation using HSV
features and (c) Segmentation using RGB features.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
2 5 10 20 40
Nearest Neighbors
Recall
HSV0
HSV5
HSV10
RGB
6(a)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
2 5 10 20 40
Nearest Neighbors
Precision
HSV0 
HSV5 
HSV10 
RGB 
6(b)
Figure 6. (a) Recall and (b) Precision variation of the new
histogram and a standard RGB histogram.
References
[1] C.Carson et al, “Blobworld: A System for Region-based
Image Indexing and Retrieval”, Proc. Third Int. Conf. on Visual
Information Systems, June 1999.
[2] A.Jain and A.Vailaya, “Image Retrieval using Color and
Shape, Pattern Recognition, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1233-1244, 1996.
[3] L.Kaufman and P.J.Rousseeuw, “Finding Groups in Data:
An Introduction to Cluster Analysis”, John Wiley & Sons, 1990.
[4] W.Y.Ma and B.Manjunath, “NeTra: A Toolbox for
Navigating Large Image Databases”, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on
Image Processing, pp. 568-571, 1997.
[5] W.Niblack et al, “The QBIC Project: Querying Images by
Content using Color Texture and Shape”, Proc. SPIE Int. Soc.
Opt. Eng., in Storage and Retrieval for Image and Video
Databases, vol. 1908, pp. 173-187, 1993.
[6] M. Ortega et al, “Supporting Ranked Boolean Similarity
Queries in MARS”, IEEE Trans. on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 905-925, 1998.
[7] A.W.M. Smeulders et al, “Content Based Image Retrieval at
the End of the Early Years”, IEEE Trans. on PAMI, vol. 22, no.
12, pp. 1-32, December, 2000.
[8] J.R.Smith and S.-F. Chang, “VisualSeek: A Fully Automated
Content based Image Query System”, Proc. ACM Multimedia
Conf., Boston, MA, 1996.
[9] G.Stockman and L.Shapiro, “Computer Vision”, Prentice
Hall, 2001.
[10] S.Sural, G.Qian and S.Pramanik, “A Histogram with
Perceptually Smooth Color Transition for Image Retrieval”,
Proc. Fourth Int. Conf. on CVPRIP, Durham, 2002 (to appear).
[11] M.Swain and D.Ballard, “Color Indexing”, Int. Journal of
Computer Vision, vol.7, no. 1, pp. 11-32, 1991.
[12] J.Z.Wang, Jia Li, Gio Wiederhold, “SIMPLIcity:
Semantics-sensitive Integrated Matching for Picture LIbraries,”
IEEE Trans. on PAMI, vol. 23, no. 9, pp., 2001.
II - 592CAUCHY – Jurnal Matematika Murni dan Aplikasi
Volume 11 (1) (2026), Pages 842-856
p-ISSN: 2086-0382; e-ISSN: 2477-3344
Analysis of Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
Performance for Image Classification
Sherlyn Vironica∗
, Sugiyarto Surono, and Aris Thobirin
Program Studi Matematika, Fakultas Sains dan Teknologi Terapan, Universitas Ahmad Dahlan,
Yogyakarta, Indonesia
Abstract
This study analyzes the effect of color space transformation on the performance of MobileNetV2
for rice leaf disease classification using RGB, HSV, CIELab, and their combinations. The
RGB color space is used as the baseline representation, while HSV and CIELab are applied
to provide alternative representations of color information. In addition, a dual-stream
architecture is employed to combine different color spaces for feature extraction. The results
show that the choice of color space influences classification performance. In the single colorspace scenario, RGB achieves the highest accuracy of 91.42%, while in the combined scenario,
the RGB+CIELab model achieves the best performance with an accuracy of 97.00%. These
findings suggest that the use of multiple color spaces can provide richer feature representations
and may improve classification performance. Furthermore, the results indicate that optimizing
input representation plays an important role in improving model performance, particularly
when using lightweight architectures such as MobileNetV2. This study shows that color space
transformation can improve classification performance in the rice leaf disease dataset used in
this study.
Keywords: CIELab; HSV; MobileNetV2; RGB; Rice Leaf Disease
Copyright © 2026 by Authors, Published by CAUCHY Group. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-SA License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)
1. Introduction
Deep learning is an approach in machine learning that models data through stratified layers
of neural networks, where each layer produces increasingly abstract representations [1]. This
approach builds hierarchical representations to capture complex patterns that are difficult to
recognize using conventional methods [2]. Its ability to automatically extract complex visual
structures makes deep learning widely applied in fields such as text analysis, signal processing,
and various modern prediction systems [3–5]. Among the various deep learning architectures,
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are among the most widely used methods for processing
grid-structured data, particularly images due to its ability to learn spatial patterns and visual
structures [6], and they are widely applied in image classification [7], plant disease detection
[8], medical image analysis [9], and industrial automation [10]. However, conventional CNN
architectures such as VGG and ResNet require substantial computational resources, making
them less suitable for deployment on devices with limited power and memory [11, 12]. To address
these limitations, lightweight CNN architectures such as MobileNet, ShuffleNet, and EfficientNet
were developed to improve computational efficiency [13].
∗Corresponding author. E-mail: 2200015016@webmail.uad.ac.id
Submitted: February 26, 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.18860/cauchy.v11i1.41353
Reviewed: March 14, 2026 Accepted: March 30, 2026
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
MobileNetV2 is one of the lightweight architectures that uses inverted residual block and
linear bottleneck to extract features efficiently with far fewer parameters, while maintaining
important information representations in low dimensions and overcoming problems [14, 15].
The efficiency characteristic and generalization of MobileNetV2 make it not only suitable for
implementation in real-time scenarios and data-limited devices, but also ideal for various smart
agriculture applications [16].
Rice is the main food source for more than half of the world’s population. Its production is
greatly affected by the health of the plant, while leaf diseases can reduce yields if not detected early.
The biggest challenge for farmers, especially in rural areas, is limited access to experts who can
make accurate diagnoses. This condition has created a need for an image-based diagnostic system
that is fast, consistent, and runs on mobile devices. The application of deep learning in plant
disease detection is growing rapidly because disease symptoms can generally be identified through
changes in color and texture in leaves [17, 18]. The integration of lightweight architectures, such
as MobileNetV2, enables image-based diagnostic systems to be applied more efficiently in the
identification of rice plant diseases, thereby increasing the speed and accuracy of decision-making
in the field [19, 20].
Previous studies have shown that color representation plays an important role in improving
the accuracy of CNN-based classification models. Previous studies have shown that the use of
color spaces such as HSV, CIELab, and YCbCr can improve the performance of CNN-based
image classification models and machine learning [21]. Another study that specifically evaluated
the effectiveness of color features for corn leaf disease found that the combination of HSV and
CIELab achieved the highest accuracy of 92.48% in classification [22]. However, these results
cannot be generalized to rice plants, which have different visual characteristics and symptom
patterns. In addition, no study has specifically assessed the effect of color-space transformation on
lightweight deep learning architectures, such as MobileNetV2, for rice leaf disease classification.
Different color spaces represent visual information in different ways. The RGB color space
directly stores red, green, and blue intensity values, which are often sensitive to illumination
variations. In contrast, the HSV color space separates hue, saturation, and brightness information,
allowing color characteristics of plant diseases to be represented more consistently under different
lighting conditions. Meanwhile, the CIELab color space separates luminance and chromaticity
components, which can highlight subtle color differences that frequently appear in diseased leaf
tissues. These properties make HSV and CIELab potentially more effective for emphasizing
disease characteristics compared to the standard RGB representation. Based on this, this study
was designed in two scenarios. The first scenario uses a single color space, namely RGB, HSV, or
CIELab. The second scenario uses a combination of two color spaces, namely RGB and HSV,
RGB and CIELab, and HSV and CIELab. This approach aims to determine the extent to which
differences and combinations of color representations affect the performance of MobileNetV2 in
image classification.
The main contribution of this study lies in systematically evaluating the impact of both single
and combined color-space representations on the performance of a lightweight deep learning model
for rice leaf disease classification. Unlike previous studies that focus on general plant datasets or
heavier architectures, this study specifically investigates the role of color-space transformation in
improving classification performance using MobileNetV2, providing insights into efficient model
design for resource-limited agricultural applications.
2. Methods
Rice leaf diseases are detected and classified using the MobileNetV2 architecture through
three types of color space transformations, namely RGB, HSV, and CIELab. Color space
transformations are used to provide image representation variations before the classification
process, while MobileNetV2 is used as the main model due to its ability to extract image features
efficiently and accurately. The methodological stages applied in this study are shown in Fig. 1
Sherlyn Vironica 843
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
Fig. 1: Flowchart of the methodology
The stages listed in the research method flowchart will be explained in more detail in the
next subsection.
2.1. Data Collection
The data used in this study came from the rice leaf disease dataset obtained through the Kaggle
platform. This dataset consists of 4,658 images of rice leaves, which are divided into three
disease categories, namely Bacterial Blight with 1,584 images, Brown Spot with 1,614 images,
and Leaf Smut with 1,460 images. Each image contains variations in lighting conditions, shooting
angles, textures, and severity of symptoms, providing sufficient visual diversity to support a
representative model training process. All images were originally in RGB format and grouped
based on their respective disease classes. This dataset was used as the main source for developing
a rice leaf disease classification model based on color space transformation and the MobileNetV2
architecture. An example image from each category is shown in Fig. 2
(a) Bacterial Blight (b) Brown Spot (c) Leaf Smut
Fig. 2: Example data for each class category
2.2. Preprocessing and Data Splitting
In the preprocessing stage, all images were resized to 224 × 224 pixels to match the input size
required by the MobileNetV2 architecture. Each image was normalized to the range [0, 1] to
obtain a uniform pixel intensity scale and improve training stability [23]. Data augmentation
was applied only to the training set to increase data diversity and reduce overfitting. The
augmentation techniques included horizontal flip, vertical flip, shift, scale, rotation, and random
brightness contrast. For the validation and test sets, only resizing and tensor conversion were
applied without augmentation.
After preprocessing, the dataset was divided into three subsets: training, validation, and
testing data. The split was performed using a stratified sampling strategy with a ratio of 80:10:10
to preserve the class distribution in each subset. The data partition was created once before
the training process, and the same split was used for all experimental scenarios to ensure a fair
comparison between different color space configurations.
To prevent data leakage, images from the same file were not shared between the training,
validation, and testing sets. All models were trained and evaluated using the same dataset
partition so that performance differences only reflect the effect of color space transformation and
model architecture. The distribution of the number of images in each subset is shown in Table 1.
Sherlyn Vironica 844
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
Table 1: Splitting data distribution
Data Splitting Class Amount
Train Bacterialblight 1267
Brownspot 1291
Leafsmut 1168
Total 3726
Validation Bacterialblight 159
Brownspot 161
Leafsmut 146
Total 466
Test Bacterialblight 158
Brownspot 162
Leafsmut 146
Total 466
2.3. Color Space Tranformation
The color space transformation process in this study utilizes three representations of color space,
namely RGB, HSV, and CIELab. The RGB color space is used as the original form of the
image without additional color transformation, while HSV and CIELab are used to produce a
more informative and stable color representation. These two color spaces were chosen because
they are able to capture changes in the color of rice leaves more sensitively, especially changes
due to disease symptoms. For HSV and CIELab representations, channel-wise normalization is
applied to scale the values into a consistent range before being used as input to the model. An
explanation of the HSV and CIELab color spaces is presented in the following subsection.
2.3.1. HSV
The HSV (Hue, Saturation, Value) color space represents color information using three components: hue, which indicates the type of color; saturation, which reflects the intensity of the color;
and value, which represents brightness [24]. This representation allows color information to be
separated from intensity, making it more robust to illumination variations.
In this study, the transformation from RGB to HSV is performed using the standard
implementation provided by the OpenCV library. Therefore, the conversion follows the internal
formulation defined by the library rather than a manually specified mathematical model. This
approach ensures consistency between the implemented method and the reported results, avoiding
discrepancies between theoretical formulations and practical implementation
The transformation from RGB to HSV results in different color representations for each
component, as shown in Fig. 3.
RGB Image Hue Saturation Value
Fig. 3: The transformation from the RGB image to the HSV image
Sherlyn Vironica 845
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
2.3.2. CIELab
The CIELab color space is a color model that is designed so that the color changes according
to human visual perception. This color space is made up of three main components: L* which
represents the brightness level, a* which represents the green gradation-red, and b* which depicts
a blue-yellow gradation. Image conversion from RGB to CIELab is done through two stages:
linear transformation to XYZ space and non-linear transformation to Lab space [25].
The first stage begins by converting the image from RGB to XYZ space using the following
matrix (1):



X
Y
Z


 =



0.4124 0.3576 0.1805
0.2126 0.7152 0.0722
0.0193 0.1192 0.9505






R
G
B


 (1)
Then, the values X, Y , and Z are normalized against the white reference values (Xn, Yn, Zn),
as defined in Eq. (2):
X′ =
X
Xn
(2)
Y
′ =
Y
Yn
(3)
Z
′ =
Z
Zn
(4)
The non-linear transformation to the Lab space is performed using the function defined in
Eq. (5):
f(t) = (
t
1/3
, t > 0.008856
7.787t +
16
116 , t ≤ 0.008856
(5)
The lightness component is computed as defined in Eq. (6):
L
∗ =
(
116f(Y
′
) − 16, Y ′ > 0.008856
903.3Y
′
, Y ′ ≤ 0.008856
(6)
The chromaticity components are calculated using Eq. (7) and Eq. (8):
a
∗ = 500 
f(X′
) − f(Y
′
)

(7)
b
∗ = 200 
f(Y
′
) − f(Z
′
)

(8)
The CIELab representation is able to highlight the color differences more subtly, making
it very effective in distinguishing between healthy rice leaves and those that have undergone
color changes due to disease. The transformation from RGB to Lab results in different color
representations for each component, as shown in Fig. 4.
RGB Image L a* b*
Fig. 4: The transformation from the RGB image to the CIELab image
Sherlyn Vironica 846
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
2.3.3. Classification Using MobileNetV2
At the classification stage, this study uses the MobileNetV2 architecture as the main model
to recognize three classes of rice leaf diseases, namely Bacterial Blight, Brown Spot, and Leaf
Smut. This architecture was chosen because it is lightweight, efficient, and capable of producing
representative features from image data while requiring relatively low computational resources.
In the single color-space scenario, the model receives input images of size 224×224×3, where each
image consists of three channels representing the selected color space (RGB, HSV, or CIELab).
In the combined color-space scenario, two color representations are processed using a dual-stream
architecture. Each color space is provided as a separate input to the model, and each input is
processed by an independent MobileNetV2 backbone so that each representation can be learned
independently while maintaining the original MobileNetV2 structure.
The features extracted from the two MobileNetV2 backbones are then combined using feature
fusion before entering the classification layer. The fusion is performed by concatenating the
feature vectors obtained from each backbone, allowing the model to utilize complementary
information from different color spaces without modifying the internal convolutional structure.
This feature-level fusion is chosen because it provides more stable learning compared to directly
stacking channels from different color spaces.
The extracted features are summarized using global average pooling and passed to a fully
connected layer with three output neurons using the softmax activation function to produce
class predictions. The training process uses the AdamW optimizer with categorical cross-entropy
loss to optimize the model parameters. All models in both experimental scenarios are trained
using the same configuration with 10 epochs to ensure a fair comparison between single and
combined color-space inputs, and all models are trained from scratch without transfer learning.
The configuration of the layers used in the feature extraction process is shown in Table 2 as
an example of the MobileNetV2 architecture. The same backbone structure is applied to all
scenarios, and in the combined color-space scenario, two identical MobileNetV2 backbones are
used in parallel before the fusion stage.
Table 2: Example of MobileNetV2 Layer Configuration
Layer Type Description
Input Layer Input Image input of size 224×224×3. In the combined scenario, two inputs are processed separately using parallel MobileNetV2 backbones.
Conv2D (Layer 1) Convolution Initial convolution layer for feature extraction
BatchNorm2D Normalization Normalization to stabilize training
ReLU6 Activation Non-linear activation function
Inverted Residual
Block×17
Depthwise + Pointwise Conv
Main feature extraction block of MobileNetV2
BatchNorm2D Normalization Feature normalization
Conv2D (1×1) Pointwise Conv Channel projection
ReLU6 Activation Non-linear activation function
Global Average
Pooling
Pooling Reduces spatial dimensions
Dropout Regularization Prevents overfitting
Fully Connected
(Dense)
Classification Output layer with 3 classes
Softmax Activation Produces class probabilities
2.3.4. Model Evaluation
Model evaluation was carried out to assess the performance of MobileNetV2 in classifying rice leaf
diseases in each color space scenario. The evaluation process includes monitoring the accuracy
and loss curves during training to observe the model’s learning progress and detect potential
Sherlyn Vironica 847
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
overfitting. After the training is complete, the model’s performance is tested using unseen test
data. The assessment is conducted using four main metrics, namely accuracy, precision, recall,
and F1-score, which are defined in Eqs. (9), (10), (11), and (12) [26–28]:
Accuracy =
T P + T N
T P + T N + F P + F N
(9)
Precision =
T P
T P + F P
(10)
Recall =
T P
T P + F N
(11)
F1-Score = 2 ×
Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall (12)
3. Results
This section presents the experimental results obtained from the application of the MobileNetV2
model under different color space scenarios. The evaluation focuses on analyzing the model’s
performance in terms of training behavior and classification effectiveness across all scenarios. The
results are organized into several subsections to provide a clearer and more structured discussion.
3.1. Training Performance Analysis
Training performance is evaluated based on the progression of accuracy and loss values during
the training process. In this study, the loss function used is categorical cross-entropy, which is
widely applied in multi-class classification problems [29]. The categorical cross-entropy loss is
defined in Eq. (13):
L = −
1
N
X
N
i=1
X
K
k=1
yi,k log (ˆyi,k) (13)
where N denotes the total number of samples, K represents the number of classes, yi,k is the
true label, and yˆi,k is the predicted probability for class k of the i-th sample.
This function measures how well the model predicts the correct class in each training process.
The training curve for each scenario is shown in Fig. 5–Fig. 10.
Fig. 5: Model accuracy and loss curves in RGB color space
In the RGB color space shown in Fig. 5, the validation accuracy increases steadily to close to
0.91 at the final epoch. The same training and validation loss curves decrease without significant
distances, indicating that the model is not overfitting. The representation of original colors helps
the model capture the texture and patterns of the disease more consistently.
Sherlyn Vironica 848
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
Fig. 6: Model accuracy and loss curves in HSV color space
Fig. 6 shows that the HSV color space has a gradually increasing accuracy curve with a
maximum value of about 0.87. Validation loss decreases steadily, but more slowly than in the
RGB color space. This happens because the intensity information in HSV is reduced, so it takes
longer for the model to recognize differences between classes.
Fig. 7: Model accuracy and loss curves in CIELab color space
In the CIELab color space shown in Fig. 7, the validation accuracy is stable but slightly lower
than that of RGB. The validation loss curve continues to decrease, but the difference between
train and val is greater than that of the other two color spaces. CIELab transformation tends to
smooth out micro-contrast that is important for the identification of disease spots, so that the
learning process becomes less optimal.
Furthermore, the combination of two color spaces enriches visual information through feature
fusion obtained from two parallel feature extraction paths. Each color space is processed
independently by a separate MobileNetV2 backbone, producing feature representations f1 and f2.
The final feature representation is obtained by concatenating the extracted features as defined in
Eq. (14):
F = [ f1 ∥ f2 ] (14)
where f1 and f2 denote the feature vectors extracted from each color space, and F represents
the fused feature vector resulting from the concatenation operation. This approach allows the
model to access complementary color representations simultaneously, resulting in a more diverse
and informative feature space for the classification process.
Sherlyn Vironica 849
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
Fig. 8: Model accuracy and loss curves on RGB + HSV combination
Fig. 8 shows that the combination of RGB and HSV converges rapidly, even though it is
trained for only 10 epochs. The validation accuracy increased sharply and remained stable
throughout. Validation loss decreases consistently, suggesting that combining native colors with
hue stability provides richer features and accelerates learning.
Fig. 9: Model accuracy and loss curves on RGB + CIELab combination
Fig. 9 shows that RGB+CIELab has excellent performance with high and stable validation
accuracy. A consistent reduction in losses indicates an effective learning process. The luminance
component of CIELab helps highlight differences in leaf texture, while RGB retains natural color,
providing the model with a more discriminating feature.
Fig. 10: Model accuracy and loss curves on HSV + CIELab combination
Sherlyn Vironica 850
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
The combination of HSV+CIELab in Fig. 10 shows that the performance improvement is still
noticeable but not as large as the other combinations because both color spaces reduce sensitivity
to intensity, so the combined information is less diverse.
3.2. Evaluation on Test Data
Model performance evaluation is carried out using accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-Score
metrics. The test results are shown in Table 3.
Table 3: Model Evaluation Results on Test Data
Model Accuracy (%) Precision (%) Recall (%) F1-Score (%)
RGB 91.42 91.69 91.30 91.33
HSV 87.12 87.36 87.22 87.13
CIELab 86.05 86.03 86.03 85.97
RGB + HSV 96.35 96.32 96.27 96.29
RGB + CIELab 97.00 96.96 97.03 96.98
HSV + CIELab 96.14 96.12 96.04 96.07
Based on Table 3, models with RGB inputs perform best in single-color space scenarios. The
HSV color space shows the lowest accuracy, while the CIELab provides medium performance. In
the scenario of combining two color spaces, there is a consistent increase in performance. The
combination of RGB+CIELab provides the best results with accuracy 97.00%, indicating that
the incorporation of native color information (RGB) with luminance-chromaticity separation
(CIELab) results in a richer representation of features for the classification process. Other
combinations, such as RGB+HSV and HSV+CIELab, also show improved performance compared
to the use of a single color space.
To further analyze the classification performance, confusion matrices were generated for
the RGB model as the best result in the single color-space scenario and the RGB+CIELab
model as the best result in the combined color-space scenario. The confusion matrices provide a
more detailed view of the classification results for each disease class and help identify possible
misclassification patterns.
Fig. 11: Confusion matrix of the RGB model on the test dataset
Fig. 11 shows the confusion matrix for the RGB model. Most samples are correctly classified,
especially in the Bacterial Blight class, which reaches the highest prediction accuracy. However,
Sherlyn Vironica 851
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
several misclassifications occur between Brown Spot and Leaf Smut. These two classes have
similar visual characteristics, such as dark spots and color changes on the leaf surface, which
makes them more difficult to distinguish when only the RGB color space is used. This indicates
that the RGB representation alone is sometimes insufficient to capture subtle differences in
disease patterns.
Fig. 12: Confusion matrix of the RGB+CIELAb model on the test dataset
Fig. 12 presents the confusion matrix for the RGB+CIELab model. Compared to the RGB
model, the number of misclassifications decreases in all classes. The improvement is particularly
noticeable in the Leaf Smut and Brown Spot classes, where the prediction accuracy becomes higher
and more balanced. The combination of RGB and CIELab provides richer visual information,
because RGB preserves natural color details while CIELab separates luminance and chromaticity
components. This combination helps the model recognize subtle color variations and texture
differences more effectively, resulting in better classification performance.
3.3. Comparison Between Color Spaces
All scenarios were trained for 10 epochs using the same training configuration to ensure consistent
experimental conditions. In the single scenario, RGB performed best at 91.42%, CIELab was in
the middle, and HSV had the lowest performance. In the combination scenario, all models showed
improved performance under the same training configuration. The RGB+CIELab combination
achieved the highest accuracy at 97.00%, followed by RGB+HSV and HSV+CIELab. These
results indicate that combining two color spaces produces richer feature representations, allowing
the model to learn more effectively. In addition, the baseline RGB-only model has limitations in
capturing subtle color variations associated with disease symptoms. Transformations to HSV
and CIELab provide additional information not available in RGB, and when combined, this
information complements each other, resulting in a more stable learning process and faster
convergence. Thus, the results suggest that color space transformation can improve classification
performance in the experimental setting used in this study.
4. Discussion
This study analyzes the effect of color space transformation on the performance of MobileNetV2
for rice leaf disease classification using RGB, HSV, CIELab, and their combinations. The
results show that the choice of color space affects classification performance. In the single
Sherlyn Vironica 852
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
color-space scenario, RGB achieves the best accuracy of 91.42%, while in the combined scenario,
the RGB+CIELab model produces the highest accuracy of 97.00%. These findings suggest
that combining color spaces can provide richer feature information and improve classification
performance. All scenarios were trained using the same number of epochs and identical training
settings to maintain consistent experimental conditions. Therefore, the observed performance
differences are likely related to the differences in input representation rather than variations in
the training configuration.
These findings are consistent with previous studies showing that alternative color spaces
such as HSV and CIELab can better capture color variations related to plant disease symptoms.
In addition, combining multiple color representations can improve classification accuracy by
providing complementary visual features. The results of this study indicate that optimizing
input representation through color-space transformation and feature fusion can enhance model
performance, particularly when using lightweight architectures such as MobileNetV2.
Compared to deeper architectures such as VGG, ResNet, and EfficientNet, lightweight models
like MobileNetV2 are generally reported to provide a better balance between accuracy and
computational efficiency, making them suitable for mobile-based or resource-limited applications.
These results suggest that performance improvement may also be achieved by improving input
representation, not only by increasing model complexity.
It is important to note that the combined color-space scenario utilizes a dual-stream MobileNetV2 architecture, where each color space is processed by an independent backbone. This
design increases the number of parameters and overall model capacity compared to the singlestream configuration. Therefore, the observed performance improvement may not be solely
attributed to the use of multiple color spaces, but may also be influenced by the increased
representational capacity of the model. This limitation should be considered when interpreting
the results.
This study has several limitations. The experiments were conducted using a single dataset
and one deep learning architecture. Each scenario was trained under the same configuration,
and repeated runs or cross-validation were not performed, which may introduce variability in the
results due to the stochastic nature of the training process. Therefore, the reported performance
differences should be interpreted with caution. In addition, the dataset was obtained from a
public Kaggle source and may not fully represent real-world conditions with varying illumination,
backgrounds, and acquisition devices. Future work may include larger and more diverse datasets,
repeated experiments, cross-validation, and comparisons with multiple architectures to obtain
more reliable and generalizable results.
5. Conclusion
This study indicates that color space transformation can influence the performance of the
MobileNetV2 model in rice leaf disease classification. In the single color-space scenario, the
RGB-based model achieved the highest accuracy of 91.42%, followed by CIELab and HSV. In
the two-color space combination scenario, all models show improved performance while using
the same training configuration, with the combination of RGB+CIELab resulting in the best
accuracy of 97.00%. These results indicate that the incorporation of complementary color
representations can enrich visual information and improve the performance of lightweight models
such as MobileNetV2.
This study has several limitations. The experiments were conducted using a single dataset and
one deep learning architecture, and the results were obtained from a single training run without
cross-validation. These conditions may affect the generalization of the model to different datasets
or real-world environments. Future research can use larger datasets, repeated experiments, crossvalidation, and comparisons with other architectures to obtain more reliable and comprehensive
results.
Sherlyn Vironica 853
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
CRediT Authorship Contribution Statement
Sherlyn Vironica: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software development, Data curation,
Formal analysis, Visualization, and Writing – Initial draft. Sugiyarto Surono: Supervision,
Validation, Methodological Direction, and Writing – Review & Editing. Aris Thobirin:
Supervision, Validation, and Writing – Review & Editing.
Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies
In the preparation of this manuscript, the author used ChatGPT and Grammarly on a limited
basis to help improve grammar, sentence structure, and writing clarity. The use of these tools is
only for language editing purposes and is not involved in methodological design, experimental
implementation, data analysis, or interpretation of research results. All scientific substance in
this article is entirely the work of the author.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The author declares that there are no conflicts of interest, whether financial, personal, or
professional, that could affect the research, analysis, or conclusions reported in this article.
Funding and Acknowledgments
This research did not receive special funding support from government agencies, commercial
institutions, or non-profit organizations. The author expresses sincere gratitude to the supervisor
for his valuable guidance, direction, and input during the implementation of the research and
preparation of this manuscript. The author also expressed his appreciation to the Faculty of
Applied Science and Technology and the Mathematics Laboratory of Ahmad Dahlan University
for the support and facilities that have been provided so that this research can be carried out
properly.
Data and Code Availability
The data used in this study comes from a dataset that is publicly available through the Kaggle
platform and is publicly accessible through the original source. The code used in the model
development, training, and evaluation process is not publicly available, but may be obtained by
contacting the author of the correspondence upon reasonable request.
References
[1] Laith Alzubaidi, Jinglan Zhang, et al. “Review of deep learning: concepts, CNN architectures,
challenges, applications, future directions”. In: Journal of Big Data 8.1 (2021). doi: 10.
1186/s40537-021-00444-8.
[2] N. I. Putri and Z. Munawar. “Deep Learning and Big Data Technology for IoT Security”.
In: J. Inform. – Comput. 7.1 (2020), pp. 48–73.
[3] F. Esmaeili et al. “Utilizing Deep Learning Algorithms for Signal Processing in Electrochemical Biosensors: From Data Augmentation to Detection and Quantification of Chemicals of Interest”. In: Bioengineering 10.12 (2023), p. 1348. doi: 10.3390/bioengineering10121348.
[4] W. She. “A review of deep learning-based text sentiment analysis”. In: (2023). doi:
10.54254/2755-2721/32/20230204.
[5] X. Kong et al. “Deep learning for time series forecasting: a survey”. In: Springer (2025).
doi: 10.1007/s13042-025-02560-w.
Sherlyn Vironica 854
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
[6] A. Younesi et al. “A Comprehensive Survey of Convolutions in Deep Learning : Applications
, Challenges , and Future Trends”. In: IEEE Access (2024). doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.
3376441.
[7] K. Azmi, S. Defit, and S. Sumijan. “Implementasi Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
Untuk Klasifikasi Batik Tanah Liat Sumatera Barat”. In: J. Unitek (2023). doi: 10.52072/
unitek.v16i1.504.
[8] S. Suhendar et al. “Deteksi Penyakit Pada Daun Tanaman Ubi Jalar Menggunakan Metode
Convolutional Neural Network”. In: J. Ilm. Inform. Glob. (2023). doi: 10.36982/jiig.
v14i3.3478.
[9] Media Ali Ibrahim et al. “Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis Article Review Media”.
In: Indonesian Journal of Computer Science 13.2 (2024), pp. 2293–2311.
[10] N. Hütten et al. “Deep Learning for Automated Visual Inspection in Manufacturing and
Maintenance: A Survey of Open-Access Papers”. In: Applied System Innovation 7.1 (2024),
p. 11. doi: 10.3390/asi7010011.
[11] C. Luo et al. Comparison and Benchmarking of AI Models and Frameworks on Mobile
Devices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.05085. 2020. http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.05085.
[12] A. Younesi et al. “A Comprehensive Survey of Convolutions in Deep Learning: Applications,
Challenges, and Future Trends”. In: IEEE Access 12 (2024).
[13] T. Shahriar. Comparative Analysis of Lightweight Deep Learning Models for MemoryConstrained Devices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03303. 2025. http://arxiv.org/abs/
2505.03303.
[14] O. V. Putra, M. Z. Mustaqim, and D. Muriatmoko. “Transfer Learning untuk Klasifikasi
Penyakit dan Hama Padi Menggunakan MobileNetV2”. In: Techno.Com 22.3 (2023),
pp. 562–575. doi: 10.33633/tc.v22i3.8516.
[15] P. T. Huong et al. “Enhancing deep convolutional neural network models for orange
quality classification using MobileNetV2 and data augmentation techniques”. In: Journal of
Algorithms and Computational Technology 19 (2025). doi: 10.1177/17483026241309070.
[16] S. F. D. Wardhana and A. Nugroho. “Perbandingan Arsitektur MobileNetV2 dan MobileNetV3 Dalam Klasifikasi Jenis Jeruk”. In: Journal of Computing Science and Business
16.1 (2025), pp. 25–34. doi: 10.47927/jikb.v16i1.916.
[17] J. Lu, L. Tan, and H. Jiang. “Review on convolutional neural network (CNN) applied to plant
leaf disease classification”. In: Agriculture 11.8 (2021). doi: 10.3390/agriculture11080707.
[18] Y. Toda and F. Okura. “How convolutional neural networks diagnose plant disease”. In:
Plant Phenomics 2019 (2019). doi: 10.34133/2019/9237136.
[19] D. Verma, D. Bordoloi, and V. Tripathi. “Plant Leaf Disease Detection Using Mobilenetv2”.
In: Webology 18.5 (2021), pp. 3241–3246. doi: 10.29121/WEB/V18I5/60.
[20] H. Chen et al. “Classification and identification of agricultural products based on improved
MobileNetV2”. In: Scientific Reports 14.1 (2024). doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-53349-w.
[21] H. M. Hassan et al. A Survey on Different Plant Diseases Detection Using Machine Learning
Techniques. 2022.
[22] P. F. Johari et al. “Corn Leaf Diseases Classification Using CNN with GLCM, HSV, and
L*a*b* Features”. In: Jurnal Teknik Informatika 6.2 (2025), pp. 709–722. doi: 10.52436/
1.jutif.2025.6.2.4345.
[23] M. Ikhsan and M. Rahardi. “Image-Based Classification of Indonesian Traditional Houses
Using a Hybrid CNN-SVM Algorithm”. In: Journal of Computer Science 9.5 (2025),
pp. 2303–2309. doi: 10.30871/jaic.v9i5.10864.
Sherlyn Vironica 855
Color Space Transformation on MobileNetV2
[24] D. Giuliani. “Metaheuristic Algorithms Applied to Color Image Segmentation on HSV
Space”. In: Journal of Imaging 8.1 (2022). doi: 10.3390/jimaging8010006.
[25] I. A. P. F. Imawati et al. “A Study of Lab Color Space and Its Visualization”. In: ICAMSAC
2023. Atlantis Press, 2024. doi: 10.2991/978-94-6463-413-6_3.
[26] M. B. N et al. “Plant Leaf Disease Detection using MobileNetV2”. In: (2025). doi: 10.
1051/itmconf/20257901021.
[27] M. S. Aryanta, C. A. Sari, and E. H. Rachmawanto. “A Banana Disease Detection Using
MobileNetV2 Model Based on Adam Optimizer”. In: 9.4 (2025), pp. 1207–1218. doi:
10.30871/jaic.v9i4.9870.
[28] G. Morris et al. “Classification of Diabetic Wounds Using Transfer Learning Model:
EfficientNetB1 and ResNet50”. In: 11.1 (2025), pp. 207–217. doi: 10 . 31154 / cogito .
v11i1.1001.207-217.
[29] A. R. Bushara. “Efficient net-based deep learning model for accurate plant disease classification and diagnosis”. In: 14.1 (2025), pp. 1264–1270. doi: 10.30574/ijsra.2025.14.1.
0170.
Sherlyn Vironica 856